A Precious Garland for the Supreme Path of the Three Types of Individual: The Root of Dakpo's
Four Dharmas

by Gampopa Sonam Rinchen

You never allow vows, commitments and devotion to decline,And uphold the lineage of scripture,
realization and blessings —To the noble gurus in the lineage of Jowo Atiśa's instructions,I
offer obeisance from my bones and the centre of my heart.

The teachings, which are the subject expressed in all vehicles,Include the stages of the path
for indviduals of the three levels,The main routes taken by the noble beings of the three
times.These are explained extensively through the four dharmas,And each is practised through
view, meditation and conduct.

With the correct view, to meditate on actions and their effects,And, as the conduct, to take
up virtue and avoid misdeeds,Resulting in the higher realms of devas and human beings —This,
in summary, is the approach of lesser individuals.

Twofold selflessness as the view, meditation on faults,[1]And, with renunciation, the conduct
of the three trainings,Resulting in a śrāvaka's or pratyekabuddha's awakening —This, in
summary, is the approach of intermediate individuals.

The two truths as the view, meditation on their union,And the six transcendent perfections as
conduct,Bringing about the result of unlocated nirvāṇa —This, in summary, is the approach
of great individuals.

Within the space-like expanse of the dharmatā nature,To use appearances as the means to train
in bodhicitta,Is to turn the two truths into the twofold accumulation,And this should be
known as the cause of the two kāyas.

To be able to give my own happiness to others —That is the true measure of loving kindness.To
be able to take others' suffering upon myself —That is the true measure of compassion.

To remain unperturbed by deliberate harm —That is the true measure of bodhicitta.Not seeking
to gain pleasure and avoid pain —That is the true measure of the view.

In the nature of my own mindAnd the nature of others' mindsThere is no dualistic separation,So
how can clinging to self and other be right?

To know the nature of saṃsāra, it is said,Is also to know the nature of nirvāṇa —Since this
is how it is taught, how can it be rightTo cling to saṃsāra and nirvāṇa as good and bad?

When it is taught that to recognize the unityOf emptiness and interdependence is the path of
the Middle Way,What is the point of requiring a separate guruWho reveals emptiness?[2]

If you understand the fabrications of your own mind,Then since everything is lacking in true
reality,No matter how things appear, they becomeA support or conducive cause for mind training
—What need is there then for any further elimination of obstacles?

This concludes this text, which was composed by the one prophesied by the Buddha to work for
the teachings here in this land of the northern snow mountains when known as Gelong Tsoché.[3]

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2018.

i.e., the faults of saṃsāra.  ↩This could be interpreted as meaning that appearances themselves
reveal the truth of emptiness.  ↩i.e., the monk physician, a common way of referring to
Gampopa.  ↩